Juba At least 21 people have been killed in a cattle raid in South Sudan on the eve of a visit by Pope Francis to encourage peace in the conflict-ridden country, local authorities said. Francis is scheduled to arrive on Friday for a three-day "pilgrimage of peace" with the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Moderator of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. The church leaders are seeking to promote reconciliation and forgiveness in a predominantly Christian country still burdened by chronic armed violence in the aftermath of a civil war. On Thursday, armed herders killed 21 civilians in a reprisal attack on a rival cattle camp in Kajo-Keji County of Central Equatoria, the county commissioner's office said. "The commissioner of Kajo-Keji County condemns in the strongest terms possible the attack on the cattle camp and the massacre of the innocent civilians in the barbaric act of revenge", its statement issued on Thursday said. Justin Welby, the Archbishop of Canterbury, said he was "horrified" by the attack on the eve of his visit. "It is a story too often heard across South Sudan. I again appeal for a different way: for South Sudan to come together for a just peace," he posted on Twitter on Thursday. South Sudan achieved independence from Muslim-majority Sudan in 2011 but soon after plunged into civil war that left 380,000 people dead. The war formally ended in 2018 but the nation remains plagued by violence waged by well-armed local militias and rival ethnic groups. This week, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the United States and other foreign missions raised concerns over signs that armed factions were preparing to fight again in Upper Nile. The state in the country's north has witnessed some of the most ferocious armed violence in South Sudan in recent months, with thousands of civilians seeking protection on UN bases. "With the historic visit of His Holiness Pope Francis, the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Moderator of the Church of Scotland to South Sudan expected to take place this week, UNMISS appeals to national and community leaders to exercise restraint and commit to peace and dialogue," it said in a statement.